h1. DEVISE / FACEBOOK CONNECTABLE

_Devise << Facebook Connect_

h2. What is Devise?

"http://github.com/plataformatec/devise":http://github.com/plataformatec/devise

h2. What is Devise Facebook Connect?

*Simple:*

A very straightforward *"Facebook Connect":http://wiki.developers.facebook.com/index.php/Facebook_Connect* authentication/linking with the ease of *"Devise":http://github.com/plataformatec/devise* and power of *"Facebooker":http://github.com/mmangino/facebooker*. If I may say it myself: The easiest way to get a Rails app authorized and connected with Facebook Connect. Authentication in Rails should be straightforward, right? Let's build awesome web-apps instead of re-inventing the authentication!

h2. Dependencies

*You'll need:*

* *"devise 1.0.0":http://github.com/plataformatec/devise* for authentication - based on "warden":http://github.com/hassox/warden/.
* *"facebooker":http://github.com/mmangino/facebooker* for Facebook API integration.

*For Ruby 1.9 support:*

* *"rails 2.3.5+":http://github.com/rails/rails* which contains a required Ruby 1.9 patch that Facebooker relies on. See _Important_ for more info.

h2. Installation

*Gem*

<pre>
  $ sudo gem install devise_facebook_connectable
</pre>

...and in @config/environment.rb@:

<pre>
  config.gem 'devise_facebook_connectable'
</pre>

*Dependencies*

Note: Should be installed automatically with the gem.

<pre>
  $ sudo gem install devise facebooker
</pre>

...and in @config/environment.rb@:

<pre>
  config.gem 'devise'
  config.gem 'facebooker'
</pre>

h2. Setup

*Devise: Setup*

See "Devise":http://github.com/plataformatec/devise documentation for instructions on how to setup Devise.

*Facebook Connectable + Facebooker: Setup*

Installs the Facebooker stuff + required Facebook Connect javascript helpers...

<pre>
  $ ./script/generate devise_facebook_connectable --api API_KEY --secret SECRET_KEY
    dependency  xd_receiver
        create    public/xd_receiver.html
        create    public/xd_receiver_ssl.html
        create  config/facebooker.yml
        create  public/javascripts/devise.facebook_connectable.js
</pre>

Note: The @--api@ and @--secret@ arguments only makes sense if you already got Facebook application details ready; can be configured later (see _Configuration_).

*Facebook Connectable: Migration*

<pre>
  create_table :users do |t|

    t.facebook_connectable

    ...

  end
</pre>

...and indexes (optional):

<pre>
  add_index :users, :facebook_uid, :unique => true
</pre>

...and then don't forget: @$ rake db:migrate@.

*Facebook Connectable: Model*

<pre>
  class User < ActiveRecord::Base

    devise :facebook_connectable, ...

  end
</pre>

*Note:* All modules must be specified on the same line since Devise 1.0.0, otherwise Devise will only load the last call @devise [MODULES]@ - which will cause FacebookConnectable to fail to initialize.

h2. Configuration

*Create a Facebook app*

..if you haven't already:

*"Create Facebook Application":http://facebook.com/developers/createapp.php*

...with settings:

Application settings > Connect > Facebook Connect Settings > Connect URL: @http://localhost:3000@ (for testing purposes)
Application settings > Advanced > Advanced Settings > Sandbox Mode: @Enabled@

...and for next step, copy-paste: @API Key@ and @Application Secret@

*@config/facebooker.yml@*

...should look something like this:

<pre>
  # ...
  defaults: &defaults
    api_key: YOUR_APP_API_KEY
    secret_key: YOUR_APP_SECRET_KEY
  # ...
</pre>

Note: For Facebook Connect only @api_key@, @secret_key@, and @Connect URL@ (configured in Facebook Application settings manager) are required.

*I18n*

Sign in/out link labels, and Flash error messages can be set using I18n:

<pre>
  en:
    devise:
      sessions:
        facebook_invalid: "Could not sign in. Invalid account."
        facebook_timeout: "Facebook session expired., please sign in again to continue."
        facebook_authenticity_token: "Something went wrong. For security reasons, please sign in again."
        facebook_actions:
          sign_in: "Sign in"
          sign_out: "Sign out"
</pre>

Note: The usage of @:sign_in@/@:sign_out@ depends on configration, e.g. not used for the traditional and default Facebook Connect button.

h2. Usage

In @app/views/layouts/application.html.*@, something like (showing only the relevant parts):

<pre>
  <!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN"
           "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd">

  <!-- REQUIRED: Include Facebook XMLNS (XML namespace). -->
  <html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:fb="http://www.facebook.com/2008/fbml">
    <head>
      ...
      <!-- REQUIRED: Include Facebook Javascript (with current locale). See Facebooker documentation. -->
      <%= fb_connect_javascript_tag(:lang => ::I18n.locale) %>

      <!-- REQUIRED: Include devise_facebook_connectable Javascripts. -->
      <%= javascript_include_tag :defaults, 'devise.facebook_connectable' %>
      ...
    </head>
    <body>
      <!-- REQUIRED: Init Facebook Javascript (using jQuery). See Facebooker documentation. -->
      <%= init_fb_connect :XFBML, :js => :jquery %>
      ...
      <%= yield %>
      ...
    </body>
  </html>
</pre>

*View:*

...add the sign in/out (connect) link somewhere - auto-detects scope:

<pre>
  <%= facebook_link %>
</pre>

...or with explicit scope:

<pre>
  <%= facebook_link :customer %>
</pre>

...or even more explicit, something like:

<pre>
  <% unless signed_in?(:user) %>
    <%= facebook_sign_in_link :user %>
  <% else %>
    <%= facebook_sign_out_link :user %>
  <% end %>
</pre>

etc.

*Model:*

...if you want to fetch and populate any data from Facebook before connect (account creation), and/or after connect (not saved automatically):

<pre>
  class User < ActiveRecord::Base
    devise :facebook_connectable

    def before_facebook_connect(fb_session)

      fb_session.user.populate(:locale, :current_location, :username, :name, :first_name, :last_name,
                                :birthday_date, :sex, :city, :state, :country)

      self.locale             = my_fancy_locale_parser(fb_session.user.locale)
      self.time_zone          = fb_session.user.current_location.try(:city)
      self.country            = fb_session.user.current_location.try(:country)

      self.username           = fb_session.user.username

      self.profile.real_name  = fb_session.user.name
      self.profile.first_name = fb_session.user.first_name
      self.profile.last_name  = fb_session.user.last_name
      self.profile.birthdate  = fb_session.user.birthday_date.try(:to_date)
      self.profile.gender     = my_fancy_gender_parser(fb_session.user.sex)

      self.profile.city       = fb_session.user.hometown_location.try(:city)
      self.profile.zip_code   = fb_session.user.hometown_location.try(:state)
      self.profile.country    = fb_session.user.hometown_location.try(:country)

      ...
    end

    def after_facebook_connect(fb_session)
      ...
    end

  end
</pre>

*DONE!*

<pre>
  $ ./script/server
</pre>

*Note:* If you experience any issues with connecting and/or signing in/out now, then I simply must have forgot something in these instructions. Please file a GitHub-issue in such case! =)

h2. Example:

Checkout my little *"live example":http://devise-facebook-connectable.heroku.com*.

h2. Advanced Configuration

In initializer @config/initializers/devise.rb@:

<pre>
  Devise.setup do |config|
    # ...
    config.facebook_uid_field = :facebook_uid
    config.facebook_session_key_field = :facebook_session_key
    config.facebook_auto_create_account = false
    # ...
  end
</pre>

h2. Documentation (RDoc)

"Rdoc.info/devise_facebook_connectable":http://rdoc.info/projects/grimen/devise_facebook_connectable

h2. Important

Stuff that you need to be aware of:

* Just to be clear: You need to use the @devise_facebook_connect@-helpers to sign in/out, otherwise it won't work.
* If you sign in a resource using Facebook Connect (with this extension), you need to sign out using the the Facebook Connect sign out helpers available. If not you will end up being logged into Facebook but not to the account, and vice-versa. Messy. Would be cool with some kind of polling script that logs the user out of Facebook if the account is signed out - but not really needed now; just a bit of common sense and use the helpers and this will not be an issue.
* For *Ruby 1.9* support you should *AVOID* installing Rails 2.3.4. This version of rails contains a bug in a session helper that Facebooker relies on. More info about the bug/patch "here":https://rails.lighthouseapp.com/projects/8994/tickets/3144. Rails 2.3.4.1 (patch release) should work.

h2. References

*Examples:*

* "Facebooker Showcase":http://facebooker.pjkh.com - not using Devise, but same-same.

*Documentation:*

* "Facebooker RDoc":http://facebooker.rubyforge.org
* "Facebook Connect Home":http://wiki.developers.facebook.com/index.php/Facebook_Connect
* "Facebook Connect Wiki":http://wiki.developers.facebook.com/index.php/Connect/Authorization_Websites
* "Facebook Connect Javascript SDK":http://developers.facebook.com/docs/?u=facebook.jslib.FB.Connect

*Repos:*

* "Facebook Connect Javascript client":http://github.com/facebook/connect-js

*Similar projects:*

* "authlogic_facebook_connect":http://github.com/kalasjocke/authlogic_facebook_connect - Facebook Connect for "Authlogic":http://github.com/binarylogic/authlogic by "Joakim Ekberg":http://github.com/kalasjocke (using "Facebooker":http://github.com/mmangino/facebooker)
* "authlogic_facebook":http://github.com/GICodeWarrior/authlogic_facebook Facebook Connect for "Authlogic":http://github.com/binarylogic/authlogic by "Rusty Burchfield":http://github.com/GICodeWarrior (using "MiniFB":http://github.com/appoxy/mini_fb)

h2. TODO / Known Issues

Priority:

* *Timeoutable* module should timeout Facebook sessions as well - configurable.
* *Specs/Features* would be great. Skipped tests so far as I built this using experimenting as I wasn't sure how Devise and Warden was working - trial-n-error style. Would appreciate any help on this. Looking into using Cucumber + "watircuke":http://github.com/richdownie/watircuke / "culerity":http://github.com/langalex/culerity.
* *Disconnect link helper* would makes sense, i.e. disconnect a Facebook account from the app/site (a.k.a. delete the account Facebook Connect style).
* *Connect existing accounts* using "Connect.registerUsers":http://wiki.developers.facebook.com/index.php/Connect.registerUsers.
* *Option: Facebooker vs. MiniFB* - a more slimmed implementation if Facebooker feels to heavy - for those who don't want to depend on Facebooker - want something more light-weight. Most probably implemented using "MiniFB":http://github.com/appoxy/mini_fb.
* *Review controller logic* - some of my Facebooker hacks in controller might not be best practice. They seem to do the job though. =)

Maybe:

* *Expired sessions* aka @Facebooker::Session::SessionExpired@ appears less now after some controller filter hacks - but needs thorough testing.
* *HAML vs ERB clash* - that I right now consider as a HAML bug - breaks the view helpers *if both ERB and HAML is used* in the same project. Can be avoided by either using HAML gem/plugin and use HAML views only, and vice-versa. Note: Something with the @form_for@-helper causing this issue.

h2. License

Released under the MIT license.<br />
Copyright (c) 2009-2010 "Jonas Grimfelt":http://github.com/grimen
